FOR_CANDACE_adding-annotation-research (#28)
fhdsl/AI_for_software: 04-annotation.Rmd

# Annotating Your Code

Code annotation, also known as code commenting, is the process of adding explanatory notes to source code. These notes are used to provide context, clarify functionality, and aid in understanding for developers who may be working on the codebase in the future. Code annotation is an important practice for any developer looking to write clear, efficient, and maintainable code.

> There are many benefits to annotating code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many benefits to annotating code:

- Improves readability
- Improves maintainability
- Improves quality
```

Reviewer: This might help guide people about what you are going to talk about

```

First, it can help to improve the readability of code. By adding comments, developers can explain the purpose of each section of code, which can make it easier for others to understand what the code is doing. This can be especially helpful for large or complex codebases, where it can be difficult to keep track of all the different components. This is particularly important in contexts where the original developer of a project may move on to something else and others are left to work on them. Annotation perhaps most often helps a developer remember things they knew about the code when they were originally writing it (annotation is helpful for future you!) If the original developer left well-annotated code, it can drastically improve the ability of others (and their future selves) to continue with the project.

### Examples of readability aiding comments

Comments that help readability **clarify what the code is doing**

**Function explanations:**  A comment at the beginning of a function or method can describe its purpose, parameters, and expected return values. This makes it easier for others to understand what the function does and how to use it.

```

> # This function calculates the sum of two numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# This function calculates and returns the sum of two numbers (x and y) 
```

Reviewer: Could add a bit to do more of what we said a function explanation might contain.

        print(item)
```

**TODO comments:** Use TODO comments to mark areas of your code that need further work or improvement. This can help you or others to remember to come back to a specific part of the code.

```
# TODO: Implement error handling for this function
def my_function():
    pass
```

**Parameter descriptions:** If a function or method has complex parameters, it can be helpful to add comments explaining what each parameter does.

```
def my_function(parameter1, parameter2):
    """
    Calculate the sum of two numbers.

    Parameters:
    parameter1 (int): The first number to be added.
    parameter2 (int): The second number to be added.

    Returns:
    int: The sum of parameter1 and parameter2.
    """
    return parameter1 + parameter2
```

**Code block summary explanations:**  If you have a long or complex code block, you can add a comment to explain what the block is doing.

```
# This code block creates a dictionary containing the counts of each word in a list of text strings
word_counts = {}
for text in text_list:
    for word in text.split():
        if word not in word_counts:
            word_counts[word] = 0
        word_counts[word] += 1
```

> ### Improves maintainability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Improves maintainability
```

Reviewer: I think we probably want this at the same header level as the other sections

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "The Dinos say ‘It’s easier for us to both work to maintain this code since it is so well annotated!’"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_37")
```

Code annotation can help to improve the maintainability of code. By adding comments, developers can explain the reasoning behind certain decisions, which can make it easier for others to make changes to the code without breaking it. This can be especially helpful when multiple developers are working on the same codebase, as it can help to prevent conflicts and ensure that the code is always in a consistent state.

### Examples of maintainability aiding comments

> Comments that help maintainability **explain why the historical decisions of why code was made the way it was**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comments that help maintainability **explain the historical decisions of why code was made the way it was**
```

```
# We used the `os.path` module to ensure that this code will work on both Windows and Unix-based systems, as the path separators are different on each platform.
```

**Limitations:** If there are limitations or edge cases that the code cannot handle, you can add comments to explain this to others.

```
# Note that this function assumes that the input array is sorted in ascending order. If the array is unsorted, the results may be incorrect.
```

## Improves the quality

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Dino says Ah I know exactly how to fix this part of the code that was annotated with a warning!"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_60")
```

Code annotation can help to improve the quality of code. By adding comments, developers can identify potential issues or edge cases, which can help to prevent these issues from occurring in the first place. This can be especially helpful when testing code, as it can help to ensure that the code is working as expected.

## Examples of quality aiding comments

> Comments that help improve the quality of the code **by explaining to other how to use or help improve it**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comments that help improve the quality of the code **by explaining to others how to use it or help improve it**
```

**Error handling:** Adding comments to explain how and why error handling is being implemented can help ensure that your code is robust and able to handle unexpected inputs or errors. This helps others know how the code was intended to be used.

```
# If the input argument is not a list or is empty, raise a ValueError
if not isinstance(input_list, list) or len(input_list) == 0:

>     raise ValueError("Input list cannot be empty")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
raise ValueError("Input must be a list that is not empty")
```

Reviewer: maybe good to have the example error provide both needed aspects for the input?

def preprocess_data(input_data):
    # Implementation details

def analyze_data(processed_data):
    # Implementation details

def visualize_data(analyzed_data):
    # Implementation details

# Load data from file
input_data = load_data("input.txt")

# Preprocess data
processed_data = preprocess_data(input_data)

# Analyze data
analyzed_data = analyze_data(processed_data)

# Visualize data
visualize_data(analyzed_data)
```

**Assumptions and constraints:** Adding comments to explain the assumptions and constraints of your code can help others understand its limitations and potential pitfalls.

```
# This function assumes that all input values are positive integers. Negative or non-integer inputs may result in unexpected behavior.
```

## AI in Code Annotation

We've discussed why code annotation and documentation are important, but when and why would you use AI for code annotation? AI can be a nice tool to supplement the annotation of your code. It should not be the only source of annotation for your code, because as the code author, you need to verify that what AI has annotated is consistent with your knowledge and history of development of the code.

>  But using AI to annotate your code can be useful to supplement existing code annotations or to annotate old code that was poorly annotated either by yourself or others who are no longer working on the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But using AI to annotate your code can be useful to supplement existing code annotations or to annotate old code that was poorly annotated either by yourself or others who are no longer working on the project.
```

 Here are some of the benefits of using AI for code annotation:

1. **Speed and efficiency:** AI algorithms can analyze code much faster than humans, which means they can quickly generate comments and annotations for large codebases. This can save developers significant time and effort, allowing them to focus on other aspects of the development process.

> 1. **Consistency:** Unlike humans, AI is not affected by personal biases or preferences, so it can provide consistent annotations across different code files and projects. This can help ensure that all code in a project is well-documented and easy to understand.

Reviewer: This could also be from just overlooking where annotations needed to be, right?

1. **Objectivity:** AI can analyze code objectively and identify potential issues that may have been missed by humans. This can lead to better quality code that is easier to maintain and less prone to errors.

1. **Learning:** AI models can learn from large datasets of annotated code and improve their ability to generate comments and annotations over time. This means that the more code the AI model analyzes, the more accurate and effective it becomes at annotating code.

1. **Specificity:** AI models can be trained on specific programming languages, frameworks, or libraries, allowing them to generate language-specific comments and annotations that are tailored to the needs of the project. This can be particularly helpful for large, complex projects that require specialized knowledge or expertise.

## Ethics of using AI to annotate code

> However, there are also a number of potential ethical concerns associated with using AI to annotate code. For example, we don't yet know how and it what ways AI models may be biased. Additionally, AI models may be opaque, which could make it difficult to understand why they made certain annotations. Finally, because AI models are not humans and don't necessarily tell the stories behind the code, they may be used to generate annotations that are not accurate, helpful, or do not tell the full depth of the history of what occurred with the code, which could lead to problems.

Reviewer: However, there are also a number of potential ethical concerns associated with using AI to annotate code. For example, we don't yet know how and in what ways AI models may be biased. Additionally, AI models may be opaque, which could make it difficult to understand why they made certain annotations. Finally, because AI models are not humans and don't necessarily tell the stories behind the code, they may be used to generate annotations that are not accurate, helpful, or do not tell the full depth of the history of what occurred with the code, which could lead to problems.

> Given these potential benefits and concerns, it is important for users of AI to always realize that they are ultimately accountable for the annotation that AI model makes and careful review of this annotation is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given these potential benefits and concerns, it is important for users of AI to always realize that they are ultimately accountable for the annotation that an AI model makes, and careful review of this annotation is needed.
```

> There are a number of ethical considerations to take into account when using AI to annotate code. Here are a few of the most important ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of ethical considerations to take into account when using AI to annotate code. Here are a few of the most important considerations:
```

> 1. **Accountability:** First and foremost, a user of AI is always primarily accountable for any output that they use from an AI model. AI models can give you annotation to start with, but it is up to you as the user to verify and review this output carefully. The user of the AI model is ultimately responsible keeping or throwing out the annotations the AI makes and thus is responsible for using errors that the model makes. Much like a user of a Google Search engine is responsible for which results they use, a user of AI is responsible what output from the AI model they use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Accountability:** First and foremost, a user of AI is always primarily accountable for any output that they use from an AI model. AI models can give you annotation to start with, but it is up to you as the user to verify and review this output carefully. The user of the AI model is ultimately responsible for keeping or throwing out the annotations the AI makes and thus is responsible for using errors that the model makes. Much like a user of a Google Search engine is responsible for which results they use, a user of AI is responsible what output from the AI model they use.
```

2. **Transparency:** It is important to be transparent about the use of AI in code annotation. This means disclosing the fact that AI is being used, as well as the specific AI model and dataset that is being used. This should be stated on every file where annotation has been made using AI. This transparency allows others who view the code to be able more fully interpret the AI-created annotation that accompanies the code.

> 3. **Bias:** AI models are trained on data, and this data can introduce bias into the model. It is important to be aware of the potential for bias and to take steps to mitigate it. This can be done by using a diverse dataset, by carefully selecting the features that are used to train the model, and by using techniques such as adversarial training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Bias:** AI models are trained on data, and this data can introduce bias into the model. It is important to be aware of the potential for bias and to take steps to mitigate it. This can be done by using a diverse dataset, by carefully selecting the features that are used to train the model, and by using techniques such as adversarial training. It is important to provide annotations that indicate any known biases, possible limitations associated with bais, and any strategies that were used to mitigate bias.
```

> TODO: How does this relate to annotation?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: See the above edit suggestion

Reviewer: I do think we need to discuss somewhere (maybe not here but in the ethics chapter or idk),  but deeper examples of how bias works and what "data" really is in these situations. Like facial recognition algorithm code might be data that could be biased because the original sources of data were not diverse. idk if this makes sense :P

> 4. **Explainability:** It is important to be able to explain the decisions that an AI model makes. This is especially important in the case of code annotation, where the decisions made by the AI model can have a significant impact on the quality of the code. There are a number of techniques that can be used to explain the decisions of an AI model, such as visualization and rule extraction.

Reviewer: could this also be about what prompts were used to guide the AI in its decisions?

## Examples on using AI for annotation

### Ask for a README summary

> To try out some annotation with code examples, this author dug up some old code that she has no idea what it does because time has passed and at the time she didn't document it very well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try out some annotation with code examples, this author dug up some old code that she had no idea about what it did anymore because time had passed and she didn't document it very well.
```

```

This README seems accurate given the work I was doing at the time. But obviously the title isn't great -- it doesn't describe the code well. Plus there's not really information about usage or outputs of the code.

So I asked it:

:::{.query}
Can you make this README more succinct and with sections about how you would use this code?
:::

This yielded a much better result.

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "ChatGPT provided a better README after I asked it to be more succinct and provide sections about how to use the code. "}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_101")
```

### Ask for line by line annotation

Second, I wanted to have ChatGPT annotate code line by line. So I asked it

:::{.query}
Can you annotate some R code for me?
:::

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "I asked ChatGPT to annotate old R code."}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_101")
```

>  It not only provided helpful annotations but it fixed spacing and added more spaces between lines of code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It not only provided helpful annotations but it fixed spacing and added more spaces between lines of code:
```

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "I asked ChatGPT to annotate old R code."}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_101")
```

> It does however, think the code is Python apparently if we look in the upper left corner.

Reviewer: wow interesting since you told it  that it was R :P

But this doesn't seem to have affected its accuracy in its annotations.

### Ask for how the code could be improved

This code is old, and I don't think it runs properly and is in no way reproducible. So I wanted to see what ChatGPT would recommend for improvements to the code. I said

:::{.query}
How could I make this code better?
:::

It had a lot of great advice:

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "I asked ChatGPT to annotate old R code."}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MCNeSO4aOm1iESWDLOGTcx3aLEbnu8UttV0QGVAeafE/edit#slide=id.g22de39942ac_19_101")
```

First and foremost it told me my variable names are not consistent and also not descriptive. Which is completely accurate! There's variable names like `xx` and `ll` which don't tell the reader anything about the variable.

### Style the code

Next, I asked chatGPT if it could restyle the code into tidyverse style. It definitely put elements that look like tidyverse however, it also put items in the code that I can tell by looking at it won't work.  

So I tried to tell it about the errors:
:::{.query}

> This code is close but there are some errors. tidyverse functions don't work with matrices

Reviewer: some tidyverse functions do work with matrices (purrr for example has several) ... so maybe change this to "These tidyverse functions"

> This code is close but there are some errors. tidyverse functions don't work with matrices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code is close but there are some errors. These tidyverse functions don't work with matrices.
```
